# Real-Time-Medical-Mask-Detection

Face mask detection had seen a major progress in the fields of Computer vision and Image processing and since the rise of covid-19 pandemic this is today’s necessity. Many face detection models have been created using several different algorithms and classifiers. We are training our covid-19 mask detector using deep learning, Tensorflow, Keras and opencv. This model has the potential to be used for safety purposes. We aim to use a pre-trained model on which deep learning and computer vision pipelines have been used and implemented. Dataset used in this model has been made manually by collecting from several different resources and applying the technique of data augmentation on it so that a large dataset can be easily created. After the model is trained we’ll proceed further to test our model on static images and real time webcam. So basically this project has been divided into two parts, in the training part mask detection model will be trained using the dataset provided. and in the application part we will load our trained model to perform mask detection. We fine tuned our MobileNetV2 architecture on the dataset and obtained accuracy of about 92%, this architecture is extremely organized and can be applied on embedded devices (ex. NVIDIA Jetson Nano, Raspberry pi). We will be compiling our model using Adam Optimizer and we will use Binary Cross Entropy as a loss function. The output images are preprocessed for removing unwanted errors and will make a rectangle box around the mask or the face. The dataset provided in this model can be used by other researchers for further advanced models such as those of face recognition, facial landmarks and facial part detection process which will be our future research area.

# Dataset used
There are only a few datasets available for the detection of face masks. Most of them are either artificially created, which doesn't represent the real world accurately, or the dataset is full of noise and wrong labels. So, choosing the right dataset which would work best for the SSDMNV2 model required a little effort. The dataset used in for training the model in a given approach was a combination of various open-source datasets and pictures, which included data from Kaggle's Medical Mask Dataset by Mikolaj Witkowski and Prajna Bhandary dataset available at PyImageSearch. Data were also collected using the dataset provided by the masked face recognition dataset and application [1]. The Kaggle dataset contains pictures of people wearing medical masks and XML files containing their descriptions and masks. This dataset had a total of 678 images. The other Artificial mask dataset was taken from 'Prajna Bhandary' from PyImageSearch. The dataset includes 1,376 images separated into two classes with wearing masks, 690 pictures, and without wearing a mask, 686 pictures. 
The artificial dataset created by Prajna Bhandary took standard images of faces and applied facial landmarks. Facial landmarks allowed to locate facial features of a person like eyes, eyebrows, nose, mouth, and jawline. This used an artificial way to create a dataset by including a mask on a non-masked person image. Still, those images were not again used in the artificial generation process. The use of non-face mask samples involved the risk of the model becoming heavily biased. It was a risk to use such dataset images from various other sources. So they have included a dataset which would consist of images of people with masks and unmasked, which compensated for the error correction. In the end, a dataset which included 5521 images was obtained, having the label "with_mask” and “without_mask” also contained 5521 images to make a balanced dataset. The created dataset can also be used for detecting assailants who cover their faces while performing unlawful deeds. The dataset has been made available at https://github.com/TheSSJ2612/Real-Time-Medical-Mask-Detection/releases/download/v0.1/Dataset.zip

# Reference
[1] Wang, Z., Wang, G., Huang, B., Xiong, Z., Hong, Q., Wu, H., & Chen, H. (2020). Masked face recognition dataset and application. arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.09093.
